>> Hello.
I'm Georgia
Shakti-Hill, and I want
to welcome you to
"Living in Balance,"
and we are living in
balance in San Francisco.
We are so pleased
to have guests who
are going to share
with us forgiveness,
because forgiveness is
the key to happiness,
and forgiveness works.
So come join us.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC]
I am so pleased to have doctors
Diane Cirincione and Gerry
Jampolsky, PhD, and
MD, and partners
in life and in forgiveness.
Welcome.
>> It's good to be here.
>> So wonderful to
be here, Shakti.
Thank you.
>> Well, you certainly
have shared the concept
of forgiveness for years
and years with people,
and it just keeps growing,
and we still need to forgive,
don't we?
>> I believe so.
>> Well, my own personal
experience with "Love is
Letting Go of Fear," which
was in a book that you had
authored, Gerry,
was so profound.
It really changed my life, and
that was many, many years ago,
and I sat down with the book
and I couldn't put it down
until I had read
the whole thing.
And then, it introduced me
to a course in miracles,
and I became a student
and a teacher of that.
So this is close to
my heart, and I'm
so pleased that, forgiveness
being the subject,
you still have, again, a
wonderful work here of,
"Forgiveness, the
Greatest Healer of All."
Now, tell me about the
Forgiveness Project.
It is worldwide, and it is
very powerful and profound,
and you're both involved.
>> We're both very involved,
and first involved because I
don't think you can possibly
have a successful marriage
unless it's completely
based on forgiveness.
Wouldn't you agree?
[LAUGHTER]
>> Absolutely.
>> Gerry and I
received some very,
very strong guidance
individually,
as well as collectively,
that forgiveness,
which has been a cornerstone
of attitudinal healing work,
that that be as important to
us as eating and breathing,
and that we bring it out in the
world in such a way that we can
cross-culturally create a
tapestry of the variations
on the theme so people will
come to understand each
other's experiences
of forgiveness.
And we're doing that through
the collection of forgiveness
stories from around the
world onto our website,
ForgivenessWorks.org, as well
as the creation of Forgiveness
Gardens.
>> And you know, Gerry,
the Centers for Attitudinal
Healing, that was your baby.
That's what you
started many years ago.
>> 1975, actually.
>> Oh, wow.
And those centers are
all over the world?
>> There are about 150 centers
or groups around the world,
all offering free services.
>> Uh-huh.
And in all these different
countries, and I understand--
>> 30 different countries.
>> --even the book that I was
making reference to, "Love is
Letting Go of Fear," you said
that it is even translated
into Farsi?
>> That is, the new book,
the forgiveness book,
is translated in some countries
it hadn't been in before,
like it's translated
in Indonesia.
>> Uh-huh.
>> Saudi Arabia, Turkey.
These are places where our other
books hadn't been received yet.
>> And we do have--
this forgiveness book
is the sixth book
of ours now being
published unedited in Iran.
>> Wonderful.
Oh.
Now, you are the president of
the Jampolsky Outreach Program?
>> Outreach Foundation.
>> Yes.
>> OK.
And so all of this, you're
seeing on a worldwide basis
that we can work together.
We need to work together
for forgiveness,
and forgiveness is something
that we can accomplish.
>> Absolutely something
we can accomplish,
and I think it's really
helpful too to look further
into understanding what it
is, and maybe what it's not.
And forgiveness,
you know, doesn't
mean agreeing with someone
else's outrageous behavior,
or supporting inappropriate
acts We look at forgiveness
from the perspective of
how you come to the place
where you can really
master your own inner life,
where you can look
at your judgments
and see where your own pain
is to free yourself from that
and have an integrity and a
harmony in what you're thinking
and saying and doing, and then
go forward to make decisions
in the world, not out
of taking your anger
to an angry situation
and making more anger,
or bringing your rage
to a raging situation.
>> I think we need to look at
forgiveness in a different way.
A lot of people don't forgive
because if they-- well,
it's a sign of weakness.
>> Yes.
>> Or it's saying, what
that person did was OK,
or condoning or
agreeing with it.
We don't forgive because we
say, oh, that personal will just
do it again.
And we don't realize that,
when we don't forgive,
we're holding on to the
toxins of anger which really
can affect every
part of our body
and every organ in our body.
And really, the
decision not to forgive
is really a decision to suffer.
And when we do
forgive, it's really
a decision to find a sense
of peace and happiness.
So forgiveness
doesn't have anything
to do with the other person.
It's not like two people
come together and say, oh,
isn't it wonderful?
We can be together again.
The other person may not change,
but we can't change the pain
that we're carrying on, and
that's what forgiveness is.
It's a releasing of the
painful past in ourselves.
>> Well, initially in your
work as a medical doctor,
psychiatry was your field.
>> Right.
>> And what-- as I
recall in your work,
you worked with people who
were experiencing illness,
often terminal illness, and
especially with children.
And they needed to
really, in order
to heal, whether it was
physically or spiritually,
they needed to forgive.
>> See, I don't think we
realize how much our unforgiving
thoughts interfere
with chemotherapy--
with the chemotherapy
of any kind.
So as we learn to open the door
for people to make choices,
we don't tell people
they should forgive.
We say, there are choices.
And when they make
that choice to forgive,
even the dying patient
can die in peace
when they begin to let go of
some of the things they've
been holding on to.
>> And we look at health
as inner peace and healing
as the letting go of fear, so
our work isn't about healing
bodies.
It's about healing your
mind, healing your heart.
>> And you know,
it's interesting.
Just when you think
that you've mastered it,
you have an opportunity
to forgive again.
[LAUGHS]
>> Well, it's not
a one shop thing.
>> No, it sure isn't.
>> I think it's a continuous
process throughout our life.
In the Center of Attitudinal
Healing in Sausalito,
California, which is
really the mother center,
now has been doing
workshops in forgiveness.
They've been doing many
things for the community
to help people
find-- you can really
find a sense of
inner peace even when
chaos and fear and uncertainty
is going on all around you.
>> And you can
choose inner peace,
and it really is something
that you do consciously.
And that's what-- you're
trying to educate people
to that, that what
they can do is
they can control their
response to a situation, not
the situation, and that is the
healthiest thing they can do
to maintain that inner peace.
>> And we don't have to be
robots that just respond with
anger.
There's nothing
wrong with anger,
but it's the holding
onto the anger that
gets us in trouble,
the attachment to anger
that so many of us have.
>> And if I could
just interject.
>> Sure.
>> It's really an important
point to make is that
there's no room for
denial in this work.
It's actually about
looking head on
and what the problem
is and what the trauma.
It's not about, like, oh
it doesn't really exist,
or using some affirmation
to cover it up.
It's about looking at it
and knowing that, you know,
do you want to honor your own
human experience, your anger,
and all your emotions, and
knowing that ultimately, it's
you that determines how long
you're going to stay angry,
how long you're going to
stay in pain, et cetera.
>> Just one quick example.
>> Yeah.
>> A musician came up to me one
day today, to Diane and I both,
and he had had a fight
with his brother.
They had not talked to
each other for seven years.
He read one of my
books and he said,
I'm going to call my brother, at
least do my part in letting go.
And the brother
answered the phone
and said, OK, I'll have
breakfast with you.
They didn't talk about the past.
They spent about three
hours with each other,
and the brother was killed
in an automobile accident
two days later.
>> Oh yeah.
>> And just wanted to
thank Diane and I for that
opportunity of really
doing it now, not waiting,
not procrastinating, not
becoming king or queen
of the procrastinators' club.
>> And you know, as
I read the book--
and it is a wonderful
book, this "Forgiveness,"
what it reminded me to do
was be aware of that anger,
and because there
will be those upsets.
And again, it came back to, but
how long will I hold the anger?
And you know, you have
to forgive yourself too.
>> Yeah.
That's what it's all about.
>> That the big one.
>> That is.
Some people say,
you can't do that.
Well, yes you can.
It is with intention that
you can forgive yourself.
>> It's necessary.
>> Well, we need all
the reminders we can.
We have this-- maybe you
can hold this up Diane.
>> Oh, I love this.
Yes.
>> I call it healing the
soul, and I really created it
for myself because
I needed to help.
A lot of people like using it,
and it fits into your shoe,
and it says, may every step
you take be one of forgiveness.
And it has our website,
ForgivenessWorks.org,
and it really helps me to
look at that every morning
and say, OK, it's a new
day for forgiveness.
>> Waiters and
waitresses love it.
>> Oh, that's a great idea.
It really is, because it
just fits right in there,
and we all put our shoes on.
>> We do.
>> May every step you take
be one of forgiveness.
ForgivenessWorks.org.
So that tells us.
OK.
And you know, we're
behaving as best we can,
because we are humans in
this situation, but we do--
we can learn, and we can
learn processes and steps.
And we'll be talking more about
those, because you've created--
you really are trying
to help us with this.
But tell me a little bit more
about this worldwide project,
what you're doing with
the gardens, you said?
>> The Forgiveness Gardens is
a part of the Forgiveness Works
Project, and that is people
coming together in community,
reaching out to each other
in any way that they want.
It could be schoolchildren.
It could be people
of different faiths.
in a neighborhood.
And a Forgiveness Garden can be
anything from-- this one group
of children had
one potted plant,
and they treated it
like a special treasure.
Others made raised flower beds.
Others make entire city
parks, whether it's
in Belfast, or in
Lebanon, in Beirut, here
in northern California.
People are creating
forgiveness gardens as a way
to come together in community.
>> And a way of raising the
consciousness of forgiveness,
because we need all the
reminders we can get.
>> And you're working especially
with children in this project
too?
>> Children as well as adults.
>> OK.
>> And the Forgiveness
Works Project,
it also collects incredible
data and information
on the theological and
philosophical and cultural
aspects of forgiveness
from all over the world.
The Forgiveness Gardens this
is a really fun and exciting,
you know, project.
In Oakland, California, there
is The Attitudinal Healing
Connection, one of the
centers, and the centers
are all independent.
In this particular center,
there's a young girl.
She was nine years of age, and
she started Children Teachers
of Peace with us back
in 1981 with Jehan
Sadat, our 10-year
project about children
reaching out in the world.
>> Uh-huh.
>> And now she's 28.
She's gone through the Oakland
College of Arts and Crafts.
She's the director of the
artist program in Oakland.
>> Wow.
>> And now, she's reaching
out to the schools in Oakland,
and schoolchildren are
creating Forgiveness Gardens,
and each step of the way, they
are learning about forgiveness,
about uncovering, about
nurturing, about planting,
about sowing seeds and
being responsible for those.
It's quite exciting.
>> In fact, it's more than
just Forgiveness Gardens.
We're really
encouraging communities
to take on a project of
forgiveness in their community,
to bring forgiveness
into their schools,
to have town meetings where
people bring their forgiveness
stories and talk about the
ways that forgiveness works,
rather than what the
newspapers talk about
and where it doesn't work.
>> So communities having a
forgiveness evening or a whole
forgiveness day.
And all that information,
those curriculums,
there's entire schools now
doing forgiveness projects
and loading on the
website so others can see.
>> At one school, we did a
workshop for forgiveness.
They want to be known as the
Forgiveness School of Hawaii.
>> I love that.
Well, you know,
with our audience
we're going to share in our
next segment 10 stepping stones
to forgiveness,
because it's something
we all need to practice.
It truly is.
So if you will stay tuned,
we will be right back
with more of forgiveness,
because forgiveness works.
[ETHEREAL MUSIC]
And if you are just joining
us, I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill,
and our subject is forgiveness,
because forgiveness works.
And our guests are Doctors Diane
Cirincione and Gerry Jampolsky,
and they are partners in life
and in this project, which
is wonderful.
I visited your website,
and I asked you
if we might share
with our audience
some of the stepping stones to
forgiveness, because I think
that serves people well,
and some of the subjects
that you had brought up
about how it isn't really
from weakness that we forgive.
It's really from
power, and it is
such a blessing to
the person we forgive,
but mostly to ourselves.
Yes.
The first point in
your stepping stones
is, we must be open to the
possibility of changing
your beliefs about forgiveness.
And how should we think
differently about forgiveness?
>> Well, so many of us spend
our lives thinking that certain
things are unforgivable, and
we hold on to that belief that
there are certain things
that we will never forgive.
So it means really being
open to that being a mistake.
Forgiveness, again, doesn't
mean agreeing with that act,
it means only healing
yourself of the pain
and anger you're holding on to.
>> Oh, I have to raise my hand.
I'm guilty on that
one, because I
have had what I'd consider some
bottom lines that were, like,
unforgivable things, and we
just can't hold on to those.
It doesn't serve as well.
>> Well, the reason we
want to still believe that
they're unforgivable is because
we think that forgiving them
means condoning them, and
forgiveness has nothing to do
with condoning or taking away
someone else's responsibility.
>> Yes.
Your second point is
about being a victim,
and we have to be willing
to let go of being a victim,
and some people have gotten
so comfortable with that it
is a little bit of
that, oh, pity me.
>> Well, it is sort of a
nice place to hide out.
It's sort of like
guilt, you know?
If I'm feeling guilt, it's
like, OK, I'm now guilty.
OK.
Now I'm guilty.
It's like-- it's like a
little corner you can hide in,
and you have to really make
choices to move yourself out
of that role.
It doesn't mean somebody
has to, but if you
decide that after a while you
want to stop being miserable,
then you have a choice.
You know you have a choice.
>> Mm-hmm.
I like that.
>> So many of us take
that past experience,
superimpose it on the present,
we keep scratching the old
wounds, and we continue
that victim role,
and we don't wake up to the fact
that we can choose not to be
a victim.
>> Yes.
>> We can process what happened
without carrying it on.
>> And I remember one of
those phrases from one
of my teachers.
There are no victims,
only volunteers.
And that really is empowering.
>> That's a great phrase.
>> Isn't that?
>> I hadn't heard that before.
>> But you know, one of the
first lines in your book--
and I love that book--
"Forgiveness," we
are responsible
for our own happiness.
And when we say that, that's
what we're really looking at,
isn't it?
>> It certainly helps you be in
a relationship more easily with
someone, whether it's
someone that you work with,
someone you've grown up
with, someone that, like,
that you're married to.
Once you realize
that, ultimately, you
are responsible--
it doesn't mean
that there aren't catalytic
effects on the world that
influence you.
Of course they do.
But ultimately, it's
how you deal with it.
Attitudinal healing is the
realization that it's not
people or events
or experiences that
happen to you that
make you upset,
it's your experience
of those things.
>> Yeah.
>> Up to 50% of people have not
totally forgiven their parents.
75% of people who
have divorced have not
forgiven their ex spouses.
So we really need to heal
those things before we can
have a real relationship today.
>> Yeah.
And you know, that's that
basic psychology 101.
And it really is so true.
We have to heal the
relationships with our parents,
and we have to forgive them.
They were doing their best.
>> Exactly.
We have to stop blaming other
people for our unhappiness
and take responsibility
for that.
>> Of course, all of those
haves and musts and should get
translated into,
you can choose to.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Because it's really OK with
me if somebody else wants to be
miserable.
I mean, it's like your choice.
>> Yeah.
>> And sometimes, we just
need to stay in that place.
I certainly do, and I don't want
somebody to pull me out of it.
So I need to be
comfortable with that,
and others can be
comfortable with it too.
I like knowing that
I have choices,
that if I am really
having a really bad day
that I can do
something about that.
>> Yes, because it feels
so much better physically,
and when you're angry
it's very uncomfortable.
>> It is.
>> Remind yourself that
your anger and judgments
can't change the past,
or punish someone else,
but they can hurt you.
>> Absolutely.
That's what we suffer from.
We suffer from our anger.
We suffer from our pain.
We suffer from our fear
of the past of what
has-- our pain in the past, and
our fear of the future of what
is or isn't going to.
So it's really the reality
that the past is gone.
It really remains
in our heads only.
The future is never
going to happen.
It's only a thought system that
actually becomes the present.
>> Be in the now.
>> So I want to respect the
future so that when it does
become the present, it
doesn't turn into chaos.
So it's about really
honoring the present.
>> Or making it more graphic,
it's like taking arsenic
and expecting
someone else to die.
>> Right.
That's true.
That is.
Like, because you're
so angry at them.
Right.
Exactly.
And they may be going on.
>> Yeah.
They might not even be here
anymore and not even know
you're upset with them.
>> Yeah.
OK.
You can see the
value of giving up
not some but all
of your judgments.
Hmm.
That is a stepping stone.
>> A major one.
We know a woman who at 90--
we met her at 94.
At 87, she completely
changed her life.
An extraordinary woman.
And when we asked her,
what is it about your--
what is it about you
that has shifted so much?
And she just looked at us.
Remember, Gerry?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And she was from
Finland, and she said,
I just gave up all my judgments.
That doesn't mean we give
up our ability to evaluate
or our thinking powers.
The difference is, you
can evaluate objectively,
and many of us are
paid to evaluate.
We train a lot of social
workers, et cetera, people
who, that's your responsibility.
That's different than
making judgments on people.
>> And we're talking about
judgements like character
assassination.
>> Uh-huh.
>> It's really possible to see
the light in people rather than
the lampshade, and we
need to stop looking
at people's behavior and
recognize that people are
either loving or that they're
fearful and giving out a call
of help for love.
And this really forms the
basis of attitudinal healing
is all about, changing
our perceptions.
>> And if you can
step back from that,
and you can see that that is
where they're coming from,
they're coming from fear, then
it is easier to forgive them--
>> Exactly.
>> --once you can be detached?
>> Oh yes.
Yes.
>> Our heart will accept
them when we do that.
>> Yes.
One can recognize that
holding onto anger
will not bring you
what you truly want.
There isn't really a payoff
for that anger, is there?
>> Well, it's a good
question to ask ourselves.
Does holding on to what I
think is justified anger really
bring me peace of mind?
And I think everyone's going
to say, no, not really,
and begin to say, well, I don't
want to hold on to that then.
>> And oftentimes it takes time,
although we don't realize that
we're the ones that
determine the time.
And so if you think
it's going to take,
you know, a year
to get over this,
then it's going to take a year.
>> It'll take a year.
>> If you think it's
going to take six months,
if you think it'll never
happen, it will never happen.
If you believe that
it's possible to happen
in an instant, then it
will happen in an instant.
There's no schedule for anybody.
It's just that, for each
of us to become aware
that we have a tremendous
amount of input and power
over the course
of our own lives--
not necessarily what
happens on the outside
all the time, because a lot
of that we don't have control
over, but what we
do have control over
are the thoughts and
attitudes and judgments
and perceptions and projections
that are inside of us.
>> And you know,
it's interesting.
There are terrible
things that happen,
and there are people
that do awful things,
and we have to just recall
that, that it isn't condoning.
Again, it is just forgiving.
>> Absolutely.
>> And stepping back from it.
>> And it doesn't mean that you
don't go out and do something
about it, but it means you don't
come from the place of your own
anger and multiplying the
anger, as I mentioned before.
It means that, once you have
found your own responsibility,
you say, what do I need
to think, say, and do
about this situation?
And then, go out on
the world and do it.
>> A couple of years ago, we
were involved in a conference
in Bosnia with religious
and spiritual leaders,
and forgiveness
and reconciliation.
And there was this one priest
that shared going to his house
and saw it burning.
Remember that?
>> Yes.
His-- he was from
Serbia, actually,
and the Bosnians had taken
his parents, grandparents,
and four siblings in a house,
sealed it up, and torched it,
and he said at the moment
that he saw that, he
realized he had two choices.
He was either going to spend the
rest of his life hunting them
down and be one of
them, or he'd have
to learn somehow to forgive.
And we found him, of
course, as a Serbian priest.
>> Oh.
>> Powerful story.
>> Powerful.
Ooh.
Now, see that there is no
value in punishing yourself,
that it's a gift to
ourselves if we do forgive.
>> That's right.
>> Yeah.
>> Gerry, talk about that pill
that you often talk about.
If somebody had a pill that--?
>> Oh.
I think I remember.
The pill.
If you read on your TV
program that a pill had
been just invented
that's guaranteed
to take away all the
anger that we ever
had, all of our
judgments, and it's free.
>> There are no side effects.
>> Yeah.
No side effects.
We'd run and get it, and this
is really what forgiveness does.
>> Ah.
>> The decision to, and
willingness to, forgive.
>> That's why you'll write that
prescription, I understand,
right?
>> Prescription for peace.
>> That's right.
You got it.
>> OK.
And we can choose to be
happy rather than right.
Ah-ha.
OK.
>> And that's right in the
sense that-- of righteousness.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> That in other
words, if I'm right,
that means I have to make
sure that you're wrong.
>> Uh-huh.
Yeah.
Making the other person wrong.
And believe that
you have the power
to choose the thoughts
you put into your mind.
So we really can control
those thoughts in our mind.
That's that practical
spirituality, even.
>> Yep.
That's what it's all about,
that no one else decides
what thoughts we put in
the body but ourselves,
and so meditation and being
prayerful, spending time
in nature, learning to
still the mind is some
of the ingredients that's
really important to begin
to discipline our minds so we
begin to have loving thoughts
rather than fearful
and attacking thoughts.
>> And you know, the
last one I just love.
Be willing to make peace
of mind your only goal,
and believe that forgiveness
is the key to happiness.
>> And everything else
can become our intentions.
But if you have multiple-- if
you have conflicting goals,
you're always going
to be in conflict.
Peace of mind means having
a harmony and integrity
in what you think, what
you say, what you do.
It's not being passive.
It's very active,
and very powerful.
>> It's really possible to
have peace of mind regardless
of what's happening
in the world.
We were in Hawaii
recently and there
was a person that's head of the
mental health department there,
and she stated that she found
that having peace of mind
was really the only
way that she can deal
with what was happening
outside, and that she
could choose to do that.
>> Ah.
That is so powerful.
It really is, and that
is being responsible
for our own happiness.
Well, bless you, and
thank you for the work
you are doing and sharing
your forgiveness with everyone
in the latest book,
"Simple Thoughts
That Can Change Your Life."
So blessings and thank you.
And if you would like to be
in touch with Diane and Gerry,
stay tuned and we'll
let you know how.
And you know we always
love to hear from you.
And then, we'll have
some parting thoughts.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC]
Gerry and Diane have
authored many books,
but the message
remains the same.
Forgiveness is the
key to happiness,
because forgiveness works.
One cannot live in
balance in mind, body,
and spirit if they do
not experience and share
forgiveness.
Until next time, I'm
Georgia Shakti-Hill.
May be well, happy, and
peaceful, and may you forgive.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC]